# Ingestion and modelling of train schedule data

Date: 2026-03-13

Status: active

## Rationale and business objectives

The project's main objective is to find, for an origin city, all cities
reachable via public transport (mainly rail), in order to suggest out of the
ordinary destinations.

Although we are interested in finding reachable destinations, the precision of
the actual trip is not the main goal (we are not building a train booking
system). In fact most of the trip's information beside duration and visited
cities (not stations) will not be shown to the end-user (pricing and fares,
train headsign, departure and arrival times, etc.). The actual scheduling and
booking is left to the end-user, outside of our application. That means we allow
ourselves to take technical and domain decisions that would make finding
destinations easier, quicker, cheaper, etc. at the cost of the trip precision or
less customization.

## Main decisions

### GTFS as the transport schedule format

- Need(s): having reliable, up-to-date train schedule data.

- Decision: we chose [GTFS](https://gtfs.org/documentation/schedule/reference/)
  as the source format for transport schedule.

- Pros:
  - Widely used and available in Europe.
  - Simple to parse.
  - Files size manageable (< 100 Mo per country for several weeks of data).

- Cons: does not model every relationships in a transportation network.

- Alternative(s): [NeTEx](https://transmodel-cen.eu/index.php/netex/) models
  more things theoretically, but at the cost of more parsing complexity and
  higher file sizes.

### Mapping a station to its city for connection

- Need(s):
  - Being able to map the same physical train station across different data
    providers that might use different IDs internally. This allows finding
    destinations using multiple companies (e.g. taking a DB train from Frankfort
    (DE) to Lyon (FR) and then a Trenitalia train to Milan (IT)).
  - Being able to connect stations within the same city without an explicit
    connection. For instance taking a train from Lyon to Paris Gare de Lyon,
    then connecting to Paris Gare du Nord to take a train to London.

- Decision: map directly a train station to the city it belongs to, using its
  lat/lon coordinates and our own instance of
  [Nominatim](https://nominatim.org/).

- Pros:
  - No explicit, hard-to-maintain mapping between data providers.
  - One shot (cities and train stations rarely move).
  - Directly map to a city, the domain entity that users are actually interested
    in.

- Cons:
  - Intra-city connections are not modelled which may lead to inaccuracies (good
    luck connecting from Gare de Lyon to Gare du Nord during rush hours).
  - Some train stations we might associate to a (big) city are not
    administratively located there, which can cause confusion (e.g. Lyon
    St-Exupery is not in Lyon).

- Alternative(s):
  - While normalization efforts for stable and universal station IDs exist,
    their adoption is limited in practice.
  - Having an intermediary internal station entity that data provider stations
    map to. Then we can model inter-internal station connection times and
    constraints.

### Caching of the transport graph

- Need(s): loading the graph of stations and trips for a given day from disk
  into memory takes around 700ms, so it's not feasible to load it for each user
  request.

- Decision: we cache the graph in memory. No validity concerns here as the graph
  is not updated once schedule data have been imported.

- Pros: graph loading time is amortized across users' requests.

- Cons: cache size, see next section.

- Alternative(s): none.

### Fixed day of travel

- Need(s): The graph is not small (contains a few millions of trips) so we have
  to be careful about the cache size if multiple days are kept in memory
  simultaneously.

- Decision: maintain a single copy of the transport graph in the cache, for the
  current day.

- Pros:
  - Cache is easy to implement as we don't need to manage its size.
  - Can warm the cache at app startup so that no request has to pay the full
    loading time of the graph.

- Cons:
  - Users cannot choose the day of their trip, which might seems
    counter-intuitive when comparing to what we expect when interacting with
    train or transportation data.
  - Possible destinations vary between days (e.g. some routes run only on
    week-end or during holidays). In practice the week-day/week-end differ by a
    few dozen destinations for an origin city like Lyon, out of 2500+
    destinations so this simplification is deemed acceptable.

- Alternative(s): implement a cache that can maintain multiple days worth of
  transport data, evicting less requested days if necessary.

### Arbitrary departure time

- Need(s): keep the destination search engine and its interface simple.

- Decision: the departure time of a trip is not an input parameter of the search
  engine. Instead each trip starts at the departure time of its first leg.

- Pros: avoid unnecessary complexity.

- Cons: less precise, but not a project's requirement.

- Alternative(s): none.

### Destination deduplication by quicker travel time

- Need(s): as the search engine computation time can be large (theoretical
  exponential growth with number of connections, millions of possible trip legs,
  etc.) we have to find optimizations to be able to serve user requests in an
  acceptable time.

- Decision: At each step of the search, we deduplicate destinations keeping the
  trip with the shorter travel time. The rail network is mostly nodal, so
  several trips can lead to the same station or city. But since we only care
  about the set of possible destinations, not the actual trips, eliminating
  duplicates saves a lot of time by preventing redundant trip expansion on later
  steps.

- Pros: search engine performances are within acceptable response time.

- Cons: some destinations involving one or more connections might be impacted :
  - over-estimation of trip duration: for a trip A -> B -> C, if the trip leg B
    -> C departs at 12:00 and we have two legs for A -> B one arriving at 9:00
    taking 1h and another arriving at 11:00 but taking 1h30, we will keep the
    first one as it is the quickest, but the overall trip duration will not be
    the quickest one since the connection is greater than using the second leg.
  - some destinations might be lost: for the same trip A -> B -> C, if the
    quickest leg A -> B arrives at 13:00 we won't be able to connect it to the
    leg B -> C departing at 12:00, even if a longer leg A -> B arrives at 11:00,
    thus losing destination C.

- Alternative(s): rather than computing on a per-request basis the set of
  reachable destinations from the origin using the transport graph, we could
  pre-compute for each station in the graph its quickest path to all other
  stations using a pathfinding algorithm, and then when serving a request only
  have to retrieve the set of destinations without needing more computation.
